Seurat


Abstract
Analysis of new and previously published single cell sequencing datasets reveals that the
SARS-CoV2 receptors Ace2 and Tmprss2 are expressed in olfactory support cells, stem cells and perivascular cells, but not in neurons.
We want to show possible ways of how Covid19 syndrome lead to olfactory dysfunction,
because the neurons function is to detect odors.


Summary
The nasal epithelium is divided in three main sections: respiratory epithelium (RE), olfactory epithelium (OE) and olfactory bulb (OB).
The RE includes many types of cells, as basal cells, cyliated cells, secretory cells and microvillar cells.
The OE includes OSN (olfactory sensory neurons) that are important because they detect odors via receptors expressed on their dendritic cilia. The OSN are supported by many other cells like substencular cells, microvillar and Bowman's gland cells, GBC, HBC (horizontal basal cell).
The substencular cells mantain local salt and water balance and phagocytose and detoxify potentially damaging agents.
Microvillar cells and  Bowman's gland cells mantain OE homeostasis and its function.
GBC are resposible for regenerating OSN during normal epithelial turn over.
HBC act as reserve stem cells activating upon tissue damage.


What we want to prove is that the olfactory dysfunction is caused by the binding between the receptors Ace2 and Tmprss2 of Sars-Cov2 and all the others cells of the nasal epithelium except of OSN.
This because OSN are responsible of detecting odors and so we want to prove that they are disabled by secondary ways, for example with the binding between substencular cells and Ace2 and Tmprss2

In order to prove this, we have analyzed the single cell RNAseq datasets of human (2 patients for RE and 2 patients for OE) and mouse (juvenile mouse olfactory bulb).


Conclusion
The identification of non neuronal cell types in the OE and bulb susceptible to Cov2 infection suggests three possible mechanism for the loss of smell/odors reported in Covid19 patients.
1 - local infection of support cells and vascular pericytes in the nose and bulb could cause significant inflammatory responses whose downstream effects could alter the function of OSNs or bulb neurons.
2 - damage to support cells (which are responsible for local water balance and ionic balance) could indirectly influence signaling from OSNs to the brain; our finding that a subset of microvillar cells are homologues of pulmonary ionocytes - which play a key role in maintaining extracellular chloride gradients in the lung - is consistent with this model.
3 - damage to sustentacular cells and Bowman's gland cells in mouse models leads to diffuse architectural damage to the entire OE, which could abrogate smell perception.





